What did you do as you all got here socially?
Who were some close friends?
What did you all do to relax?
Well, there wasn't a whole lot of time to relax in that job, but we had a lot of good friends.
My wife, as the PMS wife, the three colonels' wives were on the board of the local officers' wives club.
And so she got active, and since being on the board, they've since changed that group.
Describe, nobody knows anything about that group.
Describe that.
Well, it's an officer's wives club, and it started with the Army ROTC people and, you know, the military people in the Trigon.
It got started, and any local retired person could,
the wife could become a member, but it had to be, you had to retire from active service.
You couldn't be retired reserve or something like that, which has presented a problem from time to time.
Women wanting to come in and join, and their wife was retired as a reserve officer.
They're not eligible.
But anyway, it was retired officers, and it was strong in the Trigon, but over the years in the military services, young wives have gotten away from joining Officers' Wives Club and so forth, and a lot of them work and so forth.
So now it has evolved into almost exclusively retired officers' wives, and it's an active club.
In the years you were coming, where did they meet?
Well, they had luncheons at different places, and they had luncheons at people's houses, and meeting in people's homes or restaurants.
Three dozen, four dozen, how many people?
Oh, they would have, I imagine around 30 or more, something like that, 20 to 30, depending on, then they have coffees.
It was an active club.
It still is an active club.
Now, during those years you were Commandant, you didn't have much time off during the nine months of the school year, did you?
No, no, I sure didn't.
Christmas.
And so children came here, you didn't go?
Right, yeah, they came here.
And were you a hunter or a fisherman or anything like that?
Well, I deer hunted everybody.
Did you?
I did manage to get a few days off.
Where did you go deer hunting?
Well, down near Lano in that area and now up near Gatesville, Lampass is up in that area.
You never did stop at Cooper's to have barbecue, did you?
Yes.
Yeah, in Lano, sure.
I think that's one of the best I know of.
Yeah.
Describe what it was like working with John Colas.
Describe.
Well, it was just
Fantastic.
He is such a super, super individual.
I just, you know, I had great respect for him.
Make believe I didn't know him and describe his manner and his style.
Well, he's one of these guys.
We went to a lot of A&M Mother's Clubs meeting, and he was one of the guys who walked in there, and every mother came over, and he kissed every one of them, you know.
I used to tell him that he better be careful down there.
because some guy is a member of the Houston A&M Club, you know, that used to be a male and now a female.
I said, be careful who you kiss down there.
But he was just an outgoing, you know, had an outgoing personality and remembered names like, I just could not believe how he could remember people's names.
I've never known anybody as good as.
In fact, he said if he ever met a person, a cadet, I mean a student,
And if he didn't call them by name the next time, he'd buy them a steak dinner.
I don't know.
I'd be in the poorhouse if I did that.
Now, when he served in the armed services, he was an enlisted man, wasn't he?
No, he was an artillery lieutenant.
Oh, was he?
Oh, okay.
So he had some understanding of that.
What do you think his general principles were?
What were his guiding?
Well, he was, he was,
treat every student and every other person with respect.
That was one thing.
And to be fair and honest with them.
Did anybody ever doubt his affection for respect for the Corps?
No, no, I don't think so.
I never heard of any of them.
Yeah, he had great respect for the Corps and for the Commandant's Office and so forth.
He, I had one, one kind of, it wasn't an incident, but one situation.
And that, I found out that the disciplinary people in the student services had kicked two cadets out of the university and suspended them.
And I didn't even know there was a problem.
Well, it wasn't that there was a problem.
My problem with this is that
They took disciplinary action without me ever knowing about it.
So we went to the mat on this one, and we met with John Colas.
General Simpson was there with me, and then Ron Blatchley and Powell, Charlie Powell, was on the opposing team, you might say.
So we went in there, and I explained the situation the way I understood it.
And they explained the situation the way they understood it.
And so I said, what I want to do, if a cadet has any problems, I want to know about it.
If it's a problem that could lead to suspension from the university, then I will turn it over to the student services.
But if it's a lesser problem, I'll administer the discipline.
And of course, I will inform everyone what I've done.
So General Simpson, being the shrewd individual he is, he immediately wrote up a memorandum of understanding and put all this in writing and sent it to John Colas and sent it to Powell and to Blatchley.
And, you know, we really went after it.
We had some hard words in there.
Not John.
John was back observing, and so was General Simpson.
But anyway, we really went after it for a while.
But anyway, General Simpson sent this memorandum of understanding, and so from then on, it went the way we wanted it to go.
And there were occasions where there was an offense, and I would submit it over there, and I would always submit it with a recommendation, such as drugs.
There was a zero tolerance on drugs in the Corps.
If anybody was caught with, and usually it was someone, they'd find a cigarette in their ashtray, you know, in their automobile.
But if anyone was caught with drugs, with possession of drugs or smoking or whatever, using drugs, I would send them over and I would tell them, you're going to be suspended in the university.
Now, if you want to come back next semester, if they let you come back next semester and you want to be in the Corps,
then I want you to come in here and we'll talk about it.
But you're gonna have to assure me at that time that you're clean and you're not gonna do it again.
But you can come back, but I've gotta have some assurance.
So I would get them suspended from the university.
Did that occur?
Yes, I suspended several.
About how many?
I wouldn't know how many, probably one or two a semester.
So maybe... There may have been a drug problem, but I never was aware of it.
So in the five years, a dozen?
Well, I wouldn't have any way of knowing that.
What kind of drugs normally was it?
Marijuana.
Marijuana, smoking marijuana.
And then there was angel dust.
I got word that there was some angel dust going around in the core.
Was there any clue as to where they were getting this?
No, I often wasn't, but there were plenty of kids around selling it, and they were having problems with the civilian students.
I'm not sure they had zero tolerance over there, but I certainly did.
Was there any similarity of the individuals who were using drugs?
No.
Were they freshmen or seniors?
I can't remember that.
Did any parent ever try to intervene?
Well, I had a parent that wanted to get his son back in the Corps, and I talked straight to him.
I said, you know, I'll let him back in, but he's got to assure me that he's not going to be using drugs in the Corps.
I can't have it.
Did he come back?
Yes.
Some did and some didn't.
Nobody threatened a lawsuit?
No.
Okay.
All right, as far as you were aware,
was your action regarding drugs more severe than the policy regarding drugs by a civilian student?
I don't know what, really, I don't know what their policy was, but my policy was
Zero tolerance.
And I surely agree with you totally.
I don't think they were that strict over the civilian side.
I suspect you are correct.
Let's talk about women in the Corps, an important issue during that time.
When you got here, about how many of the 2,400 or so in the Corps, about how many women were there?
I would say there were probably about, probably a few more than 50, might have been 75.
Were they in all three branches?
Well, they were in all three branches, but we had an Air Force unit, and then we had the Army unit, and most of the Navy cadets were in the Army unit, because there weren't very many Navy cadets, but we had enough Air Force to make an Air Force unit.
So you didn't have to make any decision regarding the beginning of women?
No, no, I inherited it.
Where did you first confront any realities regarding women in the Corps?
Well, it was a constant problem because the cadets would, you know, refuse to shake their hand or they would,
They would do something, and I would have to get involved in that.
And, you know, one time they threw a dead possum or a dead armadillo into the dorm, and I think probably Zintcraft was involved in that one.
And one time they brought in some pig manure from the pig farm and put in there, and that was a, you know, that's usually happened one or two times a year.
Maybe not in the male, not in the female unit, but it may be in the male unit, but this time it happened in the female unit, and of course that has a terrible smell.
There was, it was just a constant thing.
I had one guy that mooned the girls out of the window and,
You know, I took disciplinary action.
Every time something came up, I took disciplinary action.
And I wasn't light on them at all.
Did the student, did the male members of the Corps accuse you of being too protective of the women?
Oh, yeah, sure.
Yeah, I think.
But they wouldn't speak to, sometimes, some wouldn't speak, some wouldn't shake their hand, just all kind of little things like that.
And it was constant, you know, it was just going on and on.
What other important decisions regarding co-education in the Corps did you make?
Well, the first major decision was boots, you know, letting the women wear boots.
And what had they worn before that?
Well, they had not worn boots.
They wore skirts.
And shoes.
So I formed a committee in the Corps.
and had them study it on what we're gonna do next year on, I got juniors, they're gonna be seniors next year, what are we gonna do about, how are we gonna introduce boots, and it's not are we gonna do it, it's how are we gonna introduce boots into the Corps.
And they came back with kind of a, I had Captain Bill Faulkner, who was one of my officers and one of my best officers,
And he worked well.
In fact, he was an advisor to one of the women's units, and he worked well with cadets, and he was kind of the advisor for the study group.
So he kind of helped them write it and everything.
And it came back, and it was kind of wishy-washy.
It wasn't really a definite decision on how to do things,
And there was a lot in there about don't let them wear boot pants and this and that.
So anyway, we implemented that.
And the next year we had them in boots, but they wore skirts with the boots.
And then I think the year after that, we let them start wearing pants.
But it was, you know, a lot of people resented that women were going to wear boots.
Were there other...
Were there other factors that the diehard male members of the Corps resented about the women?
Well, they just resented
generally that they were in the Corps.
They didn't have any business in the Corps.
Now, in terms of academics, I presume the women were doing as well as the men?
Oh, yeah.
They were doing as well.
And as far as military, they were doing as well.
And some of them were doing a lot better than most of the cadets.
I mean, we had some women over there that were going to make fine officers.
And that's what I used to tell the Corps.
I said, look,
It's a fact in the services that they have females, and they need female officers.
And what better place to provide female officers than Texas A&M?
So let's get with the program.
Now, let's talk about Melanie Zentgraft as much as we can appropriately.
Did she enroll as a freshman?
Yes, she came as a freshman.
Do you remember anything about her?
first months or years well no she was a pretty low profile the first year or so I and then I think it all started with she was wanting to get on the color guard and wasn't selected or something and and then now she thought that she had not gotten fair treatment oh yeah yeah yeah she thought that all along do you have any idea whether she did or didn't
I'm sure she was treated like all the other females, which was not very good.
You know, there's no question about that.
But who would have made the decision about color guard members?
Well, the color guard and, you know, that was, those were cadet.
Cadet decision.
Position and decision.
We didn't get involved in that.
But basically, she was paranoid.
She thought everybody was against her.
And I tried to work with her and tried to counsel her, and she would throw it right back in my face.
I told her, you know, I said, you're one of the most insubordinate persons I've ever talked to.
If you were in the Army, I'd court-martial you.
Do you remember where her home was then?
I don't know where it was.
I thought it was San Antonio, but I'm not sure.
I think it wasn't her.
Her mother was, I know her mother was in a wheelchair, and her father, they were divorced, and her father, I think, was in the Air Force.
That's what I thought.
Did she go to, as far as you recall, go to summer camp and things like that?
Yeah, she went to Air Force summer camp.
Now, then she wanted to be in the band.
No, she didn't want to be in the band.
She just wanted girls to be in the band.
Oh, okay.
All right.
And she wanted girls to be in the Cav.
And the thing about it is we had a girl in the Cav.
She wanted girls to be in the Ross Volunteers.
No one had ever applied.
In order to get in the Ross Volunteers, the first thing you have to do is apply.
No one had ever applied to be in the Ross Volunteers.
Did she apply?
She did not apply.
Oh, I thought she had, okay.
Not that I remember.
And as far as the color guard, we started making sure that we had females on the color guard, you know, which was only fair.
And the band, you know, there was great resentment.
Well, the band, first of all, see, the women were living in separate units.
And to put them in the band, they would have to live in a separate unit down here and then go back and forth between the band.
Well, that doesn't work out.
That kind of defeats the way the corps operates.
To be a member of the band, you need to live with the band.
Well, we didn't have any female accommodations in the band.
So it was, it really wasn't convenient, you might say.
Of course, that's no excuse.
But very few people, there was no one in the band that wanted females.
And as far as the former students go, there was no former student that I ever knew that wanted people to be in the band.
And we always said there's the world's largest all-male military marching band.
Well, that carried a lot of weight.
But anyway, it's finally worked out.
We really didn't have any girls to apply for the band.
In fact, from what I understood, the female civilian students on the campus didn't want females in the band either.
But that's, you know.
And don't I remember her writing letters to the editor and things like that about various
Feminine issues in the battalion.
I think that may have happened.
I can't, I really can't remember.
I know that she.
Well, she wrote letters to a lot of, you know, like the president.
That's what I was going to say.
She wrote letters to Jarvis and to members of the legislature.
Yeah.
Oh, yeah.
She stirred up a lot and wound up in a lawsuit.
Yes, yes.
And it was years before that lawsuit was settled.
And I don't, what was the final?
Well, they paid her off.
something I'm not sure how much it was, and they paid off the ACLU.
See, that was who was behind this, the ACLU.
Was her allegation that she had been discriminated against, was that it?
Her allegation was there was discrimination against females in the Corps.
Oh, okay.
All right.
This is now a note for the typist.
When Melanie Zintgraf graduated,
This is the Saturday commencement in May of 1980.
I was the dean of faculties about to leave to go to the University of Texas at El Paso as president.
Lieutenant Governor William P. Hobby Jr.
was our commencement speaker.
Bill Hobby as he was known by everyone.
Normally I sat on the back row at commencement as dean of faculties and would read the paperback book I had brought into the commencement inside my program.
He asked me to come up and sit beside him as the diplomas were being passed out and so we chatted and he told me to stay in contact with him.
He tried to help me and I was very much flattered.
As I was getting ready to go back to my seat,
because we were about to finish the commencement, I heard some hissing and quickly realized that the hissing coming from members of the student body was because Melanie Zentgraf was about to get her diploma.
A&M students graduate in alphabetical order by college, by major, and by name.
Melanie Zentgraf, Z-E-N-T-G-R-A-F, I believe it is, one F, happened to be
an undergraduate majoring in biomedical science in the College of Veterinary Medicine.
So Veterinary Medicine is the last college.
It has one undergraduate major, and she was the last alphabetically.
So I learned later that her family thought we had deliberately rigged it so that she would be the last of the last of the last.
There was no plan of that at all.
When she came across the stage, President Jarvis Miller,
handed her her diploma.
She took it in her right hand, shifted it to her left, put out her hand to him to shake it, and she, as I recall, and he very softly said, no way, I'm going to shake your hand.
Those people who saw that kind of took a deep breath, and their eyes brightened up.
She then turned to Bob Lacey, the registrar,
put her hand out to him, and he said, ma'am, I'm not involved in this fight.
Don Carter, the director of admissions, who was handing the diplomas to Lacey, who then handed them to President Miller, he then said, ma'am, let's keep the line moving.
She went on off the stage, and we then stood and sang the Spirit of Aggieland.
When we went into the Letterman's Lounge after commencement was over,
to take off our caps and gowns.
I remember hearing a number of regents and others saying it serves her right.
She's been a pain in the neck.
I wouldn't shake hands with her either.
About six weeks later, the board threw at Dr. Miller immediately after telling him that he would no longer be the president.
that apparently one of the first things they said to him was, quote, you refuse to shake hands with an A&M graduate.
Melanie went on to active duty in the Air Force, and we don't know whether she's still on active duty or not, do we?
No, she was on active duty several years, but she had problems in the Air Force just like she had here.
uh you know the same allegations that they were she was being discriminated against or women being discriminated against then she got out of the air force and went to work for fedex and uh i've heard had sources tell me that the pilots in fedex didn't want to fly with her because she was
accusing people of different things and threatening to sue people and so forth.
So I don't know if she's still with FedEx.
Was she a pilot?
Yes, she was a pilot, yeah.
Did she or anyone speaking in her behalf ever try to confront you?
She did.
Did anyone, her family or a lawyer?
No, no.
Well, the lawyers, see, I was supposed to be defended
by the army because there were five of us sued and so the army was notified that i was being sued in my capacity here at a and m and so they sent down an army major and he we talked about and he went back and the next thing i know i was informed that the department of justice would defend me so they sent down two two liberal lawyers from from washington
And I met with them for a day, and they were here a couple of days, I guess, and spent a lot of time with them.
But when they went back, the next thing I heard that I was going to be dismissed from the lawsuit because the Department of Justice wanted to enter the suit on Zipgraf's side.
So I was dismissed from the lawsuit.
It was either with or without prejudice.
I can't remember which it was, but I was dismissed in such a fashion that if I said anything or did anything, I could immediately be brought back in the lawsuit.
So I wasn't free and clear.
I was just out of that lawsuit at that particular time.
Finally, when he went to court down in Houston, that was one of the things I brought up.
to the judge that, you know, I was, I always thought there was a client, a client attorney privilege involved and then I told him about the, you know, about the fellow from the Justice Department that talked to me and then turned right around and passed the information I had on to the Justice Department and they made a decision to enter the case on Sintcraft's side.
opposing Texas A&M.
Well, they shut me up real quick.
They didn't, no one wanted to talk about that or discuss that in the federal court.
So they cut me off of that approach.
Were there, in your five years, were there any other lawsuits?
That was the only lawsuit.
Any other threats of anything like that that the Commandant had been under?
I don't think there was a threat of a lawsuit.
All right, now let's go.
What were some of the most joyful moments?
Proudest?
Well, you know, the core reviews, that was great.
And any time we, like one time I went to, got a trip to Washington, D.C.
to where one of the former cadets received the outstanding ROTC cadet for the United States, a big trophy.
In fact, A&M won that trophy twice.
I wonder where those two cadets aren't they?
Well, the one that won it is dead.
He died a few years ago.
And I can't remember the other fella who, but we had the trophy down here for a year, got to keep it here.
And you know, moments like that are proud.
And when you give awards to people, that's a great moment.
Parents' weekend, that's always a great time when all the parents come
They have the activities in the core area.
What about final review?
Well, of course, final review, that was a problem, too, because they would come out in all kind of garb on the second time around, and I tried to show them pictures of how final review used to be, and, you know, it was a dignified, honorable service, I mean, event.
And so I finally got them where they looked a little better.
you know, now they wear, I guess it's all right, they wear their outfit t-shirts, but before they were coming out in cut-offs and sharts and things like that, and it was really bad.
In fact, what we normally would do, we would let the general officer see the first go around, and then we would take him, we would get rid of him, get him out of the area.
We didn't want him to see the second go around.
So, you know, that was an ongoing problem, and
And the final review always was on the drill field.
On the drill field, yeah.
What is now the Simpson drill field.
Let's see, normally did you go, you went to commencements?
Yes, yes.
Well, I didn't go to commencement.
I would go to the, unless they were going to commission at the commencement.
Oh, okay.
Now, during the fall, I mean, during the spring commencement, we had a regular commissioning exercise.
During the winter, we usually had a commissioning along with the graduation, and during the summer, same thing, commissioning with graduation.
Let's see, did the curriculum in ROTC instruction change in your years?
Well, when I was in the Corps, the curriculum was branch ROTC, like I took infantry ROTC.
And as it turned out, they didn't send me to branch school the way they do now.
They'll send people to branch school to get qualified because I had the infantry training.
Well, I went straight into the Army, and I was in the Army almost five years before I went to school.
So it changed.
That was a big change for the Army program.
Now, of course, the Air Force program, and I really didn't know much about that, or the Navy Marine program, I didn't know much about that.
The Army would have general, it was general military science.
Now, you've got some tactics and things like that, but basically it was general military science, and go to summer camp at the end of your junior year.
With the Air Force, they went to summer camp at the end of their sophomore year,
And I'm not sure how they, what all they did, because I never really paid attention to the Air Force program for the other services.
And all of those matters were decided by the service.
Yes.
Y'all didn't pick the curriculum, did you?
No, no.
The way I used to put it, when those cadets crossed that road out there and to the Corps area, then those are my people, the Corps of Cadets.
I'm responsible.
When they cross the street this way and come in and go to ROTC classes, then they're Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Air Force responsibility.
And whatever you want to do there is fine, but once they cross that street, they're mine.
And their classes of ROTC instruction were generally in the Trigon?
In the Trigon, yes.
In fact, they were all in the Trigon.
Academically,
Could anybody have seen much difference in the three branches in those days in performance, grade point ratio, and so forth?
I'm not aware of that.
With what other institutions in the United States
did you try to make comparisons?
Well, there was an organization of military colleges.
And we, once a year, we would meet at one of those military colleges for a conference.
And so I made a trip to Norwich, to VMI, the Citadel, Virginia Tech, North Georgia, and then Texas A&M.
considered military colleges.
However, Virginia Tech and North Georgia was a little different, and A&M, of course.
But Virginia Tech and A&M were the only two that were real university-like.
Yes, yes.
Citadel was, I don't know, a few thousand.
VMI, probably 2,000 or less.
I mean, Norwich, 2 or 3,000.
During the five years you were responsible, did you sentence